hello everyone I'm pleased to announce
my new tour for
2024 beginning in early February and
running through June Tammy and I an
assortment of special guests are going
to visit 51 cities in the US you can
find out more information about this on
my website
jordanbpeterson.com as well as accessing
all relevant ticketing information I'm
going to use the tour to walk through
some of the ideas I've been working on
my forthcoming book out November 2024 we
who wrestle with God I'm looking forward
to this I'm thrilled to be able to do it
again and I'll be pleased to see all of
you again soon
bye-bye my favorite question actually is
uh to ask in job interviews how can I be
guaranteed to be involved in projects
that are critical to the Strategic
future of this organization and it
completely changes the outcome cuz that
is not just what your skill set is for
this particular job maybe they got a job
you in the mail room and now you're
somebody that says yeah not only will I
do the little jobs to learn this from
the bottom up but I want I want to make
everybody's life better I want to help
everybody succeed now I'm willing to
learn I'm coachable now it's a different
[Music]
conversation hello everybody I'm
speaking to Chris Voss today an American
Author teacher and hostage negotiator
for the FBI we talk primarily about
negotiation with foray into the into the
psychology of listening the rationale of
listening we're attempting to sort out
and to clarify exactly what it means to
negotiate
successfully positing I suppose that the
ultimate goal of a negotiation should be
something like the establishment of a
productive long-term generous Mutual
collaboration and to expand even that to
understand that a good collaboration
involves the joint pursuit of mutual
desire let's say but also the joint
pursuit of the ability to expand the
understanding of what that desire might
be across time that's how a relationship
grows so we talk about how to do that we
talk about about how to listen and do
that concentrating as well on the fact
that if you listen to people they'll
tell you what they need and want and
then you can be in a position to provide
that and to be of utility in the
long-term sustainable productive
generous relationship
so welcome to the discussion so Chris
let's start with this why don't you tell
me and everybody who's watching and
listening what it means to negotiate and
let me put a little context around that
you know one of the things I really
noticed as a clinician was that people
are remarkably bad at negotiating and
they're not trained in it ever and so
that really hurts people because it
means that they frequently it means they
don't know what they want they don't
know what the person who they're dealing
with wants and even if they do know what
they want they don't know when to talk
about it they become bitter often about
the fact that they're not talking about
it and they have no idea how to proed
and that's it's unbelievably common so
tell me what you think negotiating means
and how you got interested in it and
also if that if that's how you
conceptualize yourself fundamentally as
as a negotiator or Communications
facilitator yeah well for me to
negotiate is to collaborate and find a
better
outcome uh in the early days I was
always teaching the adversaries not the
person on the other side of the table
the adversar is the
situation and that if you're negotiating
with and negotiating with versus against
people but negotiating with somebody
you're faced with two aspect different
aspects of the same
problem and if you can
collaborate then not only might you
solve the problem you might come up with
a better
outcome and I kind of backed into
this uh because I wanted to be a hostage
negotiator I didn't really know what it
was about complicated it was going to be
how satisfying it was going to be and I
remember I was on a SWAT team with the
FBI and I wanted to switch over to
hostage negotiation because I had a
recurring knee
injury and I like crisis response and I
thought you know I could negotiate those
I could talk to terrorist how hard could
it be you know my son and I have always
joked that divorc family motto is how
hard could it be so stuff that looks
really easy is often incredibly
challenging so I volunteered on on a
suicide hot hotline and then then which
is just about listening to people and
suddenly you know you get a change in
behavior in a very short period of time
by listening to
people and so that's and to to your
point about people not knowing what they
want in in point of fact I've learned
it's impossible to know the best outcome
because you don't have all the
facts and so go in with an open mind and
you probably discover something new and
do it in a way way that the person wants
to talk to you again and then then
there's a long tale so that that's so
those are some of the high points I
think okay okay so well let's dive
into you mentioned a number of things
here and I'll I'll outline them and then
we'll delve into them sort of Point by
point so you're paying close attention I
worked with
people I'm doing my best
man I I worked with my clients a lot
practically I did a lot of business
Consulting I did a lot of work with
people who were trying to develop their
careers um I did a lot of strategizing
around things like
uh I wouldn't say raising people's
salaries because that's not the right
way to think about it but helping them
develop the skills and confidence to
maximize their economic potential and to
develop plans around that so and one of
the things we could zero in on that
might be of interest to people is for
example is negotiating raay now you said
that you want to collaborate and find a
better solution that you talk with
someone not against and that reminded me
as well of the necessity of developing a
joint Vision so let me tell you what we
used to
do in Practical terms when I was setting
someone up to have a conversation with
their boss about advancement including
arrays sometimes people don't
necessarily want to to raise they want
opportunity and they want advancement
and the only way they can conceptualize
that is as more money and so you have to
get that straight too but so you know I
said my principles were something
like it's very difficult to negotiate if
if you are not in a position to say no
no matter what okay so I would make sure
my clients had their CV well prepped
that we had filled in any gaps that they
knew the job market around them and that
they were ready and willing to look for
another job if necessary so then they
weren't terrified right they weren't
taking themselves
hostage exactly exactly because yeah and
it also they it also meant they had a
better sense of their actual market
value right because that's something you
actually need to do if you're going to
negotiate for advancement or a raise
it's like well what evidence you can't
get a raise just because you want one
everyone wants a raise right and you
have to understand that you're manager
is dealing with financial constraints
and the fact that everyone wants a
raise so you have to make a case and
then you might say you could make a case
with a threat and one threat might be
well if you don't give me a raise all
leave but generally all you do is put
people's back up with an approach like
that you may need to have that in your
back pocket just to make you confident
but my notion
was when I and I was dealing with people
who either work credible or who had put
themselves in a position to be
credible what they would deliver to the
boss was first of all a statement of
their value and a description of that
because it's you don't know how much
your boss knows about the work you do
especially if you're one of those people
who does your work quietly and well and
sort of invisibly and that's even worse
if you're agreeable so that other people
can take advantage of your work and
pretend it's theirs so the first thing
you might want to do is make sure that
your boss actually knows what you do do
without being chest thumping about it
and then you might say what it is that
you could offer if you were offer
offered additional opportunity and that
might be you know like the observation
that if you don't believe that you're
making what you're worth in the market
that your motivation is less than it
might be or that you don't feel that
you've been valued by the organization
and so if you had a pathway forward
you'd be more committed to the Joint
goal that you share with your boss and
hopefully you have one in relationship
you have to make a case for what it is
that's in it for him too and also or her
and also ensure that if he has to go
make a case to his Superior that he's
completely armed and ready to do that so
there was the de so you don't assume
that you're in an antagonistic
relationship with your boss and if you
are and that's intractable then you know
it might be time to think about either a
radically new approach to your work or a
different job job but if not you assume
that you could present him with a
solution so anyways those were some of
the ground rules that we established and
so I'm kind of curious about how you
might elaborate on that and what you
think about that and yeah I love it I
mean those are great ideas those are
great great starting points and you know
what I might add to uh the basis of that
conversation like the the first p uh
part about you know having a resume
knowing what Market is not taking
yourself hostage one of the things that
I loved uh that I learned from being a
hostage negotiator is how to negotiate
without a
net um and my Harvard brothers and
sisters would call that bat now what's
the best alternative to negotiate
agreement and that's so that you Release
Yourself of fears that you don't take
yourself hostage you can go in with with
no
alternative and have enough faith in the
process to just be engaged to be curious
to listen to discover the better outcome
and so the Baton idea or the
alternative's idea is is a good starting
point if you feel like you're taking
yourself hostage but what it really is
is it it's to create this psychological
construct so that you don't freeze up so
that you don't take yourself hostage and
as hostage negotiators you know we just
never theoretically we never had a bat
you know you you got to make the deal
you you you got to work it out and kind
of get used to uh walking that tight RPP
without a net and then it's no big deal
but the principle to begin with is how
to not take yourself hostage and that's
a brilliant principle to start with okay
what does it mean give me some examples
of what it would mean for someone in a
practical situation or even in a dire
situation to take themselves hostage and
maybe a story or two about that and
also some illustration of how you
circumvent that that uh error
yeah well it's like there aren't I don't
have a better job I got to take this job
and I'm coming out of uh you know I I
did uh right after I left the bureau to
sharpen up my resume and to create some
better opportunities and I went to
Harvard uh Kennedy School of government
got a masters there uh which is
astonishing that they let me in uh you
know very average bluecolor dude from
the
Midwest um and then afterwards um uh job
market was horrible come come out of
Harvard 2008 dep of financial crisis I
mean not no jobs anywhere and one of my
one of my colleagues is uh fellow
students he's like look I I'm trying to
negotiate for a job and I got to take
the job there aren't any jobs out there
and they're going to ask me what I made
of my last job and it's going to be half
of what I need to make now and I can't
answer that
question and I said like all right so
here's what we're going to do you you're
going to you're going to go in with some
great calibrated questions calibrated
questions in my venacular Black Swan
method is not questions to get answers
but questions to create thoughts in the
other side's mind open their brain up a
little bit you you want to get
completely out of the concept the fact
that you don't have Alternatives doesn't
change your value to this company and
and the fact that you don't have
Alternatives does not change anything
about their ability to pay you and how
much you could contribute if you're the
right guy that gets dropped into the
right job and so you got to ask them
what happens if you guys don't fill this
role how can I be most successful for
you and how am I supposed to
accept a salary that's half of what I'm
worth you know these are differential
questions okay so let me let me let me
ask you about that
so one of the things I want from someone
that I partner with and this would
include someone I'm hiring as well say
as a peer
relationship I want to know what
agreement we can come to that I'm
thrilled about that I know they're
equally thrilled about and there's a
technical reason that I want that I mean
there's two sources of motivation
fundamentally there's go in by negative
emotion like pain and fear and there's
enticement by positive motivation and
that's usually associated with hope in
relationship to a goal and so for the
gentleman that you just described who's
feeling constrained because he only has
one option which is take the job or
leave it and he thinks the only option
is take it he's he he still has a
question to ask himself and this is a
really profound question it requires
honesty and the profound question is
what circumstances have do I have to be
do I have to have in place so that I can
devote myself wholeheartedly to this job
so so how can I exit the interview and
accept this new job feeling that I have
a landscape of opportunity in front of
me and bereft of resentment and that
will require if someone's going to ask
themselves that that will require that
they prioritize their needs and wants
and salary may be one of those things
but you know you could imagine that
there might be other ways of of even
moving around that so to speak
because you might be able to offer your
new employer the following deal it's
like well I'll take a starting salary
that's less than I would regard as
optimal or even necessary but I want to
know that if I hit a certain set of
Standards within a certain time that
there's a pathway to improve Financial
returns that opens up to me that we all
agree on and you tell the person you're
negotiating with that the reason you
want that is because like we're not
playing around here we're trying to
negotiate optimal motivation and I want
to be able to assure you when I leave
the motivation that I or the negotiation
that I am thrilled with outcut and
because who the hell wants to hire
someone who starts the job feeling like
they've been taken advantage of and and
being resentful like that's a really bad
way to get things going okay so so so
you pointed out that guy who thought he
had to have the job still was in a
position to tell his potential employers
what it was that he had to offer to make
a case for the value of his services and
to point out what that is not only worth
from the market perspective but also in
terms of his own motivation yeah and and
there's a fit issue
too and it like any other relationship
like a personal relationship you know
business relationship close relationship
significant other you got you got to get
a fit and my favorite question actually
is uh to ask in job interviews every job
interview and every annual review uh
talk to me by a friend of mine is Tom
maab extraordinarily successful guy CEO
of an International
Bank we uh we talked about this
extensively we went to high school
together his question is how can I be
guaranteed to be involved in projects
that are critical to the Strategic
future of this
organization and I said before the
calibrated question is designed to
trigger
thought that question immediately
changes their perspective of you when
you ask it like you're telling them look
I want to advance everybody's life here
I want to play a big game I want to be
with the people that are at the highest
levels of performance in your company
and I want to move everybody forward
with that one question
and it completely changes the outcome
cuz then it's not just what your skill
set is for this particular job maybe
they got a job for you in the mail
room but you want to you want to be the
head of the
division and you want to know how to get
there and you want to get there by
succeeding in taking everybody with you
now that's a completely that's a
game-changing conversation that's a
completely different conversation maybe
they they they they thought they were
bringing somebody in to push a mail card
around and now you're somebody that says
yeah not only will I do the little jobs
to learn this from the bottom up but I
want I want to make everybody's life
better I want to help everybody succeed
now I'm willing to learn I'm coachable
now it's a different
conversation so tell say that question
again well I'm willing to learn and I'm
coachable and I want to make everybody's
life better I'm doing a I'm doing a
virtual keynote a couple years ago uh
the CEO of the company and his entire
sales team and we got a we got a a
keynote going and one of his sales team
literally asked me while he's on the on
the call how do we negotiate with this
guy to get more
money and everybody's kind of holding
their breath what am I gonna say am I
gonna say in front of him and I said ask
him this question and it was a question
that I just gave you how can I be
guaranteed to be involved in projects
that are critical to our strategic
future and when I said that question he
interrupted and said I wish everybody on
this call would ask me
that did you notice that big tech
companies today are masquerading as
privacy companies just fix your privacy
settings turn off app tracking and
you're all good they say big Tech
literally feeds on your information
collecting and selling your data is in
big Tech's nature they can't stop
themselves from looking at what you do
online to protect myself against prying
eyes I use expressvpn when you use the
expressvpn app on your computer or phone
you're hiding your unique IP address
websites can't use that address to find
out your real location or track what you
do online on top of that expressvpn
encrypts and reroutes 100% of your
online activity so your internet
provider Wi-Fi admin and hackers can't
see it the best part though is how easy
it is to use it just takes one click to
protect all of your devices one
expressvpn subscription covers up to
five devices at the same time so you can
protect your entire family too that's
why expressvpn is rated number one by
CNET wired tech radar and countless
others so today the day get the VPN that
I trust to protect my online privacy
when Big Bad Tech is at the door visit
expressvpn.com Jordan and you can get an
extra 3 months free on a one-year
package that's exp
rsvpn docomo to learn
more
absolutely well you know psychologically
speaking so again with regard to
motivation people live on Hope and
opportunity to a large degree and hope
and opportunity are experienced in
relationship to a goal and so to have
hope and opportunity you need two things
you need a goal and then you need to
observe yourself walking on a pathway to
that goal and so the lines that you just
laid out there how can I be positioned
I'm going to paraphrase it if I get it
wrong let me know how can I position
myself so that I'm in the company of and
accompanying those who are moving
forward to the destination the company
actually wants to achieve how can I make
sure that I'm doing that well you said
on the one hand you're opening up the
vision of the people that you're
speaking to and you're indicating to
them very clearly that you want to be
where the action is and you're going to
be a part of that that but for your for
yourself what you've done is you've
opened up the door to meaningful
engagement with the company now the
price you're going to have to pay for
that is
responsibility like and that's why you
can't use these sorts of questions as a
technique right if it's a technique
you're a liar if if you've thought this
through and that's what you want well
then you're also the sort of person that
anyone with any sense would want to hire
because it's certainly the case that
when I'm
if you have any sense as a manager when
you hire someone what you're actually
doing them is offering a set of
indeterminate opportunities and you're
hoping that the person you're hiring is
more qualified than they would need to
be for the position that you're hiring
them for now you may not re regard that
as a requirement but you're certainly
hoping for it and the best conversations
I have with people that I might want to
work with or have work for me let's say
are the conversations where where they
clearly indicate that they know where
the Enterprise is going and why they're
perfectly willing to do the tasks that
are part and parcel of the specified job
but they've got an eye to the broader
vision and then they have enough
perspicacity and intelligence now and
then to contribute perspicacity come on
now I'm a regular guy from there you go
there you go yeah yeah you went to
Harvard you should be able to have a
perspicacity so and then then you know
you're you're well if you surround
yourself with people like that then you
always have people who are looking out
for where you're going with fresh sets
of eyes and who are offering
opportunities for you to go there too
and that speaks to the idea that you had
that a negotiation is a collaboration
you know and you might say well I'm not
collaborating with my boss it's like
well if you're not collaborating with
your boss you well that's it well if
you're not you should think about if
that's your problem or his problem or
both your problems or maybe it's time
really to go look for some greener
pastures exactly right cuz if it's if it
is an adversarial relationship all the
way to the bottom and you're being
forced or compelled to do things you
don't want to do against your wishes
then you're not optimally situated in
your life now I know that sometimes by
necessity people can be stuck in
situations like that for some period of
time but man you need an Escape Route
like you need to plot an Escape Route if
you're in a situation like that yeah
yeah and and I like to touch on
something else you mentioned just real
quickly and talking about that you know
when you ask that question that you
really mean it I mean we've had these
discussions in my company and with the
people that are running my company and
who were hiring and one of the thing we
make clear like if if you come work for
me you're going to work hard we're going
to work you hard you got to want it and
the phrase that I'm using now is
pressure makes diamonds but you got to
want to be a diamond and we're telling
people that up front you want to be a
diamond we're going to take you there
but you got to want to be a diamond and
you got to you got to willing be doing
the work and you want to
Coast um you want it to be you know
something you do when you're not at home
all right there jobs out there like that
but it ain't with me you know pressure
makes diamonds you got to want to be a
diamond yeah well one of the things I
would also do to
prepare with my clients to prepare them
for movement forward was to work through
the blind spots in their Vision let say
in the knots in their life that might be
interfering with their desire to be a
diamond you know because people people
will also misconstrue that they'll think
well I don't want to work too hard it's
like you're not thinking about the work
properly if that's your attitude because
first of all if you love what you're
doing you might really want to work hard
and if you don't love it that means you
don't really see the point you don't see
the end goal you don't see the value in
it and then you know maybe you do see
the value but you're lazy and UND
disciplined and maybe you have your
rationals for that too and so all that
needs to be worked through you know
because I I do think that first of all
most of the meaning in people's lives
comes from the adoption of voluntary
responsibility and most people do
actually want to be diamonds but they're
afraid of the work and they're also
afraid that it's going to be imposed on
them right and they're going to be
forced into it and they don't have a
vision of their own and so one of the
things that everyone who's listening and
watching might want to understand is
that before you go into a job interview
you know you might want to have done
some serious thinking about just exactly
why it is that you want this job and if
the answer is well I need to pay next
month's rent like fair enough you know
but that is not a good enough reason
that's not a vision for your life and
that's not the sort of vision that's
going to make you a compelling
interviewee because you're shallow right
you haven't thought through why it is
that you're going to do what you're
doing you know we have this program
online called future authoring and it
helps people develop a vision for their
life and so the game is this and you can
think about this as preparation for a
crucial job interview it's like imagine
yourself five years down the road okay
so here's the game you can have what you
want but you have to specify what it is
and then someone might say well you know
I don't really know what I want and fair
enough cuz that's a pretty vague Global
question but the program then asks
people seven questions it's like what
would your relationship look like your
primary relationship your marriage if it
was functioning the way that you would
want it to what about your friendship
what about your business relationships
are you educating yourself how are you
going to do that how do you keep
yourself in mental and physical shape
what are you going to do with your time
outside of work you know um how are you
going to serve the community so those
are and so that's starts to
differentiate it right and then the game
you play there with yourself is
okay under what conditions would I be
motivated to pursue success in those
areas you know and people are scared of
this because partly because they don't
want to reveal to themselves what they
actually want because they might betray
themselves or be betrayed by the world
and partly because they're afraid of the
responsibility and they don't have
enough Faith but it's impossible to hit
a Target that you don't aim at and and
then you might say well why is that
relevant to a job interview and there's
a bunch of reasons is that if the job
interview goes well and you actually
start to have a discussion rather than
just a staged interview if you have a
vision for your own life you're going to
be able to see if this job will work for
you and that also puts you in a good
position in the interview because you
pointed out earlier as we were talking
that you know even in a job interview
that's a
negotiation and the reason it's a
negotiation is is cuz well you want the
job but hopefully they want you and
you're the right person and so really
the interview should be establishing the
preconditions for the collaboration that
you described rather than you know
pulling the wool over some idiot's ey so
that they'll hire you so you can slack
off which seems like a pretty damn
dismal vision of what your life might be
right yeah agreed agreed and and
thinking those things through I mean
we've interviewed I've had some
interviews for assistance of my job
recently
uh that were cut short because the
people that were doing the interviews uh
didn't know what company they were
interviewing for they got it mixed up
and like all right so there's a certain
lack of degree of preparation here thank
you very much for your time right right
yeah yeah well you know because yeah
well you're going to ask yourself aren't
you if someone comes in and they don't
know what it is that you do or what they
would do
then the first question that would come
to mind is something like well then what
do they know
because that's so that's such an
elementary error that it that it well
that it's essentially catastrophic well
that's an indicator of what they're
going to put into the
job how you do anything how you put
that's right it's well what they what
they already did put into the job
because the the most important task they
had as a potential highe was preparation
for the interview and if they failed
that well that's not a great start and
then that's especially true you know
another thing for everybody watching and
listening to think about too is that it
is the case that first impressions are
lasting there is a very long and dense
psychological literature establishing
that you know and so you want to be
prepared enough in the interview so that
people walk away from talking to you
thinking geez you know it'd be a good
thing if we got that guy and certainly
you're in a much better position to do
something like celer negotiation if
that's the impression and the valid
impression right that's another thing is
this can't be look man if you're going
to start your new job on a stack of Lies
you've you've you've already ensured
your failure in some fundamental sense
and so if you're afraid before you go
into the interview that you're not
prepared you want to get prepared so
that you're not afraid like that so that
you can go and you can admit your
inadequacies honestly as long as they're
not so you know absolutely
multip there's not so many of them that
you're obviously not the candidate for
the job so hey Jordan I'm GNA have you
coach me on my next job
interview you talked about
listening yeah okay so tell me tell me
about that and about paying attention
and tell me how you learned why that was
so important and tell me what you
learned about how to listen wow all
right so actually listening as opposed
to staying
silent um it accelerates a
process and you need you need a set of
tools to keep you on track to dig into
the information without the other side
feeling interrogated and that was really
what I learned way back when On The
Hotline um you know I get there first
day we get into the
training and I remember the thing that
struck me first was they said all right
your calls are Li limited to 20 minutes
and I remember thinking like what 20
minutes you got to be kidding me like
you know on TV they're on the phone with
people for hours if not days and 20
minutes and they said no as a matter of
fact if you actually use the skills
correctly uh it'll take less than that
and so you get taught a set of listening
skills on how to dial in and the clues
of what to listen for and then how to
get the person interacting with you
without making it feel feel
interrogated and suddenly there were
astonishing changes in behavior in the
person on the other side you get
somebody on a phone who's genuinely
suicidal and 15 17 18 minutes later
they're in a good place and they're
ready to go back and take on the world
based on the
experience so and then I started
learning some of the science after it
you know science pseudo scientist I'm
you know I'm I'm I'm a Layman I'm not a
scientist but in our
capacity our capacity to hear words
exceeds the amount of information we can
keep in our head but the amount of
information in your tone of voice is
going to tell me more than the words are
so how I learned to listen was the words
are the starting point but the tone of
voice at a body language and what's the
alignment and then if there's a shift in
the alignment in that moment you know to
look for it and then anticipate
I know now that you're uh you as a human
being you uh in general
terms the negativity is going to Cloud
your thinking more than anything else so
I'm listening for those negatives and
from the hotline and now what we do in a
Black Swan method how do I deactivate
those negatives to clear your head or
even anticipate them so it's supplied
emotional intelligence and and then why
listen because the CH what we would call
hostage negotiation change of
behavior and in business negotiation or
personal interactions you changing your
mind as to the best outcome is going to
come much more quickly and effectively
and in a lasting way than if I talked
you into it or if I misled
you you know I I want the I want
whatever agreement we come to to be
durable to last without me having to
come back to you daily to see where we
are and that's what listening is really
about understanding the
nuances of what's now backed up by
Neuroscience and what people in hostage
negotiation and you as a practitioner in
a field of human nature for years came
to learn was the reality of how human
beings think and how they react yeah
well you said um you want to negotiate a
durable solution and that means one that
will sustain itself without you having
to come back and so you could you could
put it this way uh
barring you can become a micromanager
because you have a certain obsessiveness
of character let's say and a certain
intrinsic distrust and then that's
something you should work on but you can
also become a micromanager if you
negotiate a very bad agreement with
someone because if you've talked them
into it or force them into it then and
they feel that they've been taken
advantage of then their heart won't be
in the task and what that will mean is
that they will be looking for Escape
Routes all the time instead of doing
what they're supposed to be doing and
that you'll have to go back to them in
the most frustrating of manners and use
up all your valuable time and energy
trying to enforce a stupid agreement
that you shouldn't have made to begin
with you know and this is part of the
problem you said you know you don't want
to talk someone into something now
that's not the same as informing them
about an opportunity that they might not
have conceptualized in laying out a
different route but really what you're
aiming for is voluntary agreement like
full voluntary agreement and right part
of the reason and and you touched on
this part of the reason that listening
is so necessary is because if you listen
to the person you can find out and help
them find out what it is that they
actually want and how that could
conceivably be delivered to them and you
know you might think the person already
knows that but it's not necessarily the
case you know people think well they're
talking and in fact that's how most
people think period is when they're
talking and it also means if no one's
listening to them they almost never have
an opportunity to think you know you can
imagine like even if you're running a
restaurant that I shouldn't say even
it's very difficult to run a restaurant
if you're running a restaurant you're
hiring a
dishwasher one of the things you're
going to be concerned about is whether
that kid is going to show up to work
because
absenteeism in entry-level jobs like
dishwashing is rif and the probability
that the guy won't show up is pretty
high and so that drives restur Alters
mad so what you want to find out from
the dishwasher at least in principle
is how can we get you here 15 minutes
early every day it's got to be a serious
question it's like I want you to think
about this for a minute you're you're 15
let's say you're you got your entry
level dishwasher job it's like under
what conditions would you be pleased
enough to come to this workplace so that
you actually come and what impediments
can you imagine that might arise and how
can we set the situation up so that that
probability is decreased and that is all
you want to know from the kid that what
he thinks might sideline him so that you
can circumvent it if possible and
obviously the same thing applies as you
scale up the sophistication of the
negotiations how can we make this work
that's a good guideline for a successful
negotiation not how could I come out of
this ahead that's such a stupid way of
looking at a situation because it's
temporary right if if I screw you over
while we're talking because I'm better
at verbally manipulating you and I think
you won't take that out on me
Opportunity by opportunity as we move
forward into the future I'm an absolute
bloody damn fool exactly yeah you're
going to take it out of me you're going
to look for outs or even when problems
arise you're just going to keep silent
you like ah you know what I I know
people will hurt you by doing nothing
and you don't want that to happen either
the Black Swan technique that you
referred to tell me about
that well it's a
collection of the emotional intelligence
skills that started with hostage
negotiation there were eight FBI hostage
negotiation
skills and I I came out uh thinking like
you know there's some adaptability here
after after I went through um the
Kennedy School I was looking if I got
into Harvard Law school's negotiation
course as a student when I was an FBI
agent and I work with some brilliant
people there Sheila Heen Doug Stone Bob
manukan Bob bordone brilliant people and
I just did my hostage negotiation thing
while I was going through the
course and they said to me you know you
doing the same thing we are the stakes
are different but the Dynamics are the
same so I thought all right so I'll use
these FBI called them active listening
skills Harvard called them active
listening skills we had made them very
definable very practical very usable
because when you're teaching skills to
cops if it's not
usable and practical and clear like you
get booed off the stage fast they want
to pla practical
stuff and when Harvard really gave me
the green light like this stuff works I
started teaching at Georgetown
afterwards my son Brandon was a critical
part of the development of those skills
and we just took the eight skills we
made them we got them nine now made some
slight tweaks in some of the thoughts as
we appli them to business and personal
life but it's a collection of emotional
intelligence tactical empathy skills
that work because the way human beings
are
wired um worldwide just they work on a
lyic
system the which is the emotional
components the circuitry the wiring and
the brain that everybody has by virtue
of the fact that they're human and it
pretty much operates the same regard
less of gender
ethnicity religion geography diet
because you're
human we are experiencing a lot of
global instability as we plunge into
primary season how are you protecting
your family in the midst of all this
chaos the fact is there is one asset
that has withstood famine Wars and
political and economic upheaval dating
back to Biblical times and that's gold
it's not too late to diversify an old
Ira or 401K into gold and Birch gold
group can help you with that Birch gold
can help you create a well-thought out
and balanced investment strategy they'll
help you convert an existing Ira or 401K
into an IRA in Gold without paying a
penny out of pocket diversify into gold
today just text Jordan to 98 9898 for a
free info kit with an A+ rating with the
Better Business Bureau countless
five-star reviews and thousands of happy
customers
I encourage you to check out Birch gold
today text Jordan to
9898917350 know that and but you talked
about active listening skills and you
mentioned that there are there were nine
components to that is it possible to
walk through those nine sure yeah and I
think a better term these days is really
proactive you know you're anticipating
you're paying really close attention
you're understanding how the person is
wired and you're understanding how what
sort of neurochemical changes take place
when you feel
understood I stand up in front of a
group of business people on a regular
basis and I'll say to them how much time
do you have for somebody who's not
listening to
you and they don't have any time for it
now they'll they'll test them a little
bit they'll interact
shortly but somebody's only pitching or
somebody's only got answers it doesn't
even matter how good those answers are
because if somebody's not listening at
some point in time they're going to need
an
adjustment and if they're not listening
they're not going to make that
adjustment you know salesperson
counterpart of any kind you come up to
me with the perfect answer maybe you got
four perfect
answers you're most interested in giving
me your answers as opposed to hearing me
out
first I I I know at some point in time
you're not going to have a perfect
answer and if you haven't been listening
you're not going to catch it and we're
going to have some real problems so you
start showing how you listen
uh uh
intermittently
proactively then it's really going to
accelerate our conversation and I know
that when there's a problem you're going
to catch it instead of me having to come
back to you after the problems become
very
damaging it's about anticipating and
staying ahead of the game in general
terms part establishing a relationship P
yeah instead of selling you know I went
out to sell 20 years ago probably out of
Academia I I was still practicing as a
professor but I also started to sell
some products that I had
designed and I had the wrong idea about
sales really to begin with I had a
solution to a a set of problems that I
thought were rif in the business world
and I wanted
to convince
probably with evidence that the solution
I had developed was going to work and it
was a hiring solution but what I didn't
understand it took me a while to
understand was that I was actually
introducing a problem into the mix
because they already had a way of hiring
and so if they were going to switch to
me there was a lot of retooling that
needed to be done and I didn't actually
know what their problems were and so I
learned
eventually
that there was no such is selling there
was the establishment of a relationship
and also the feeling out it's like if
you go talk to someone in a given
company it isn't necessarily the case
that they're going to want what you're
buying you got to figure out what their
problems are and one of the things
that's really cool about that too is
that if you're entrepreneur oriented and
you've made a product and you go out and
you try to sell it to 10 people and they
don't buy it but all 10 of them tell you
about a different problem and all of
them have it you now know what your next
product could be at least in principle
because you know where the actual
Marketplace problem is and I learned
after that that software designers for
example who have a track record if
they're designing a new piece of
software they do it in collaboration
with their customers they build a bit of
it they go ask them you know how do you
think about this does it solve the
problems that you have and if they say
no they modify it like there's a
constant dialogue between the market
let's say and the producer you don't
build build a better mouse trap and have
the world beat a path to your door you
do it in collaboration and and if you
can get people to tell you their
problems then you can be the person who
can work with them for a solution and
then they're going to be pretty damn
happy when you show up for a sales call
right so and you talked earlier about
iterability too you know that you you
want to make sure that you've conducted
the conversation so that the person
would like it if the conversation
happened again and that is the that's
like the definition of a relationship
like you have a relationship with
someone with whom you would like to
continue the conversation indefinitely
and the great salespeople they're
relationship managers man that's what
they do and they have their Rolodex full
of the people they know and they listen
to them they don't go sell them junk
that doesn't work to rip them off to
make a quick buck and vanish that's what
Psychopaths do and it's not a very good
strategy so all right so you talked
about proactive listening and you give
the person an opportunity to lay out
what they have to say what what other
steps are associated with this nine step
process well it's kind of it's nine
tools as opposed to nine
steps uh the step you want to gather
information and establish a relationship
simultaneously now most people think you
do one or the other hey how are your
kids where' you go to
school uh uh what do your kids do your
kids in Little
League the small talk that's people the
this Common Ground thing which is it's
for C
players um common ground in my opinion
is was designed initially like if we got
similar Common Ground then ideally you
understand where I'm coming from but in
point of fact it's highly
inefficient look at your
siblings how much more common ground
could you possibly have than with the
people you grew up with talk about
common ground of geography ethnicity
diet religion as much as possible and
how many family gatherings around
holidays or Screaming matches that's
what common ground will gets you but
people really want to know is do you
understand what my problems are do you
understand my perspective do you
understand where I'm coming from so if I
dial in to start out understanding and
feel you out and I'm going to say seems
like this whole process has frustrated
you seems like there's a reason
that you're struggling with this you
know I'm I'm actually I'm taking
emotionally intelligent educated
guesses and I'm
listening now that gives me gets me into
an information gathering process and
relationship building process
simultaneously instead of one and then
the other which is highly inefficient
which is why this ends up being a much
this indirect route ends up being much
faster I'll look at you and I say look
look it seems like you're having a good
day if you look like you're having a
good day I don't I don't I don't ask
people how they are I make a guess as to
how they are based on what I'm seeing
because that tells them right away I'm
dialing into you I'm seeing you as you
are I'm not trying to make you something
you're
not that gives me an advantage right off
the bat I get I get help in
airports and in places where people are
constantly interacting with people in
customer service faster than anybody
else does because if I see the the lady
behind the counter at LAX who's clearly
worn out and distress by the last five
people that were
demanding and I walk up and I go like
seems like it's been a tough day she's
helping me right off the bat I don't
walk up and say how are you today as if
I'm trying to make her
happy I'm I'm I'm letting her know that
I see her as a human being and I'm I'm
started off much faster with far less
friction by paying actually paying
attention to people with this proactive
listening set of skills than than than
other people you're putting yourself in
her position really and by using
non-verbal cues and so forth to to
occupy the same conceptual space that
she has right well and I was thinking
too while you were saying that you know
that you're also
approaching cuz if if you're selling
something you might think that you're
goal is to sell like the product right
but you see the thing is too you don't
know if that's your goal because you
might not want to establish a short
medium or long-term relationship with
the person that you're talking to you
might really want to but you might not
to you might not be the right vendor for
them you might not be offering a
solution to a problem they have they
might be a psychopathic son of a
that's unlikely but it's possible like
it could be a real problem well and also
especially if you're dealing with big
companies you know if you enter into a
sales agreement with a company so you've
hit a home run from the monetary
perspective you can easily end up as the
employee of someone you don't want to
work for right so you have to be very
careful and so one one of the things I
try to do this with my podcast is like
we haven't talked before and I want to
get myself in the headspace before the
podcast like well who is this person
like what is it that they're up to you
know and why have they had the course of
success that they've had it's a the the
encounter in some ways is open-ended
it's like I I'm here because I think
something might arise out of this that's
positive but I'm not exactly sure what
it might be and so I need to know what
they want for sure maybe more than
anything else and then I want to see if
there's something here for both of us
that we couldn't accomplish on our own
and and then that it also stops you from
using the club say if you're a sales if
you're selling or if you're negotiating
and and that's a very ineffective way of
moving forward anyways people hate that
fundamentally and they get resentful and
bitter about it and so okay so you you
try to put yourself in another person's
position and that's not a technique
again you're doing that by actually
paying attention and there's a bit of an
open-endedness about what it is that
you're that you're aiming at and how
you're going to go about it so you have
the proactive listening element you have
the close attention um you're not too
concerned with that sort of formulaic
small talk that might establish a False
Consensus or similarity and that can
easily become manipulative okay so what
else what else yeah well then I'm going
to tease out you know never be so sure
of what you want that you wouldn't take
something better which is a little bit
of the point you were making a moment
ago what do you really want from the
person what what do they like friend of
mine Joe polish has a phrase don't deal
with people who are half and Joe says
half is hard annoying lame and
frustrating they suck the life out of
you and they're very inefficient and
they make your life miserable so I'm I'm
gonna want to try to find out what kind
of person you are how good of a match we
are how our core values line up because
I want a long collaboration is
prosperous for both of us now you might
not want that and you're entitled to not
wanting that but then I'm entitled to
move on because I want to find somebody
that wants that well and you also
definitely want to figure that out
because if that's your goal because that
is the establishment of a productive
gener generous collaborative goal
oriented relationship that's mutually
desirable
and you want to let the other person
reveal themsel because you don't want to
delude yourself even as a consequence of
your own verbal ability you don't want
to delude yourself into thinking you've
established the kind of relationship you
wanted and find out that you were wrong
that's another reason to listen it's
like you want to be sure you you got the
picture yeah so you know what sort of
thing you're stepping in to right right
and and I I know it's going to sound
very harsh but when I was teaching at
USC had a female come up to me to class
and she's like you know there a lot of
employers out there that want to pay me
less because I'm a female if I got an
employer that's paying me less because
I'm a female how do I negotiate a better
deal and I said all right so I'm going
to ask answer you as if I was your dad
and you just asked me hey the guy I'm in
a relationship with treats me badly how
do I get him to treat me better my
answer to you is go someplace else
there are plenty of places you want to
be somewhere where they value you and if
their core value is to pay you less
based on your
agenda they're going bankrupt anyway
that's a bad strategy they're going and
you don't want to go down the tubes with
it so you want to be someplace where
somebody values your work don't try to
fix a bad employer any more than you try
to fix a bad significant other there's
somebody out there better for you and
you're far happier and far more
productive and have a far better life by
moving on so if the person whether
you're in
sales or whether it's your
employer if their core values don't line
up with yours they're entitled to their
core values move on and line up with a
team that's going to move you farther
ahead in your life than anybody else
that doesn't line up with you ever would
you said that you shouldn't try to fix a
bad employer you know in the the
managerial literature indicates very
clearly too that you shouldn't try to
fix a bad employee so two relations I
like your thoughts on this but well
absolutely well so first of all it's not
easy to fix someone and um it takes a
long time it's a dubious Enterprise and
they need to be bloody well fully on
board with that and willing to make the
appropriate changes and the probability
that you're going to have an errant
employee with a history of bad behavior
and that you as a manager say with 20
people to ATT to are going to make
substantive changes in that person's
basic psychological makeup while the
evidence suggests very strongly that
you're just not going to and all the
literature I read that was at the
crossover between the clinical and the
managerial suggested that you spend all
your time as a productive manager with
your best people and what that also
implies is those are the people that you
hire you know and with regards to firing
people which is also a kind of
negotiation you know I had this friend
who's one rough guy and companies used
to hire him to fire people and I didn't
like firing people and I still don't and
I asked him how he tolerated the
emotional stress that came along with
that and he said that he liked do doing
it and I said what do you mean you like
doing it cuz that was just like outside
of my wheelhouse but I I knew this guy
and I respected him and he said look I
go into companies and I find the people
who kiss up and punch down I find the
people who take all the credit I find
the people who don't distribute any of
the benefits I I find the manipulators I
find the people who are lying about
their motivation or even who are just in
the wrong place doing something they
shouldn't be doing and I let them know
that I see what they're doing and I'm
pretty damn happy when they leave and I
thought hey man fair enough you know and
the negotiation there like if you do
have an employee that isn't performing
well part of the negotiation there is to
say something like
look it should be evident to both of us
that there's something that isn't right
about what's happening here and we could
drag this out painfully Kicking and
Screaming bitter and resentful for the
next 15 years or we could just like cut
our losses and maybe you could go find
something that would suit
you and you know I've seen this in my
clinical practice cuz I had lots of
people who came to me in the aftermath
of being fired and of course that was
often almost always to some degree
devastating but it wasn't that uncommon
for people 6 months later especially if
they actually did try to put themselves
back together to be immensely relieved
that they no longer had that particular
noose around their neck yeah there's so
many reasons why the severing of a bad
relationship is good for better for for
both parties and who has to do the
severing is often a hard part I was
involved in trying to let somebody at a
charitable organization go a number of
years ago affiliated with a church and
I'm going to the minister of the church
for
guidance and I'm expecting him to say to
me because this was a great man man's
name was Arthur calandro minister of
marble Collegian Church New York City
phenomenal human being one of the best
guys I've ever known and I thought
Arthur was going to counsel me on you
know
guidance and you know all the stuff I
expected and he looked at me and he said
there's no gentle way to cut somebody's
head off and I thought wow you know and
for Arthur to tell me that was the
reality of business relationships
personal relationships like if it's bad
for you it's bad for them too and
they're going to be better off you if
they're half for you if they're hard
annoying lame and frustrating you are
for them too so you're not doing anybody
a favor by hanging on to a bad
relationship it's hard to separate and
in many cases uh the jolt that comes
from it leaves both sides much better
off yeah well I know I know a phrase
like that too I I don't know if this was
something specific to Northern Alberta
but um if you have to cut the tail off a
cat you don't do it an inch at a
time
yeah well
said yeah that's rough but but it makes
sense all right so we wanted a fair ways
through the the nine um tools that you
associated with proactive listening is
there more to flesh out there well
they're mostly the different skills
label it's is a verbal observation it
sounds like there's something on your
mind sounds like what I just said it's
causing you
hesitation there's something we refer to
as a mirror that's just repeating one to
three-ish words of what somebody just
said it's not the body language mirror
it actually really opens up people's
thinking paraphrasing you're kind of
putting yourself in a position to come
up with a great summary for the other
side summarize their perspective if you
can summarize the other side's
perspective the two of you are on the
same sheet of
music there's calibrated questions what
and how questions that are designed to
cause somebody to think about somebody
I might say in in order instead of me
saying to you like look you got to take
action because the status quo is killing
you instead of if I want to put that
thought in your head I'm going to say
what happens if you do
nothing how are you better off by
failing to address this problem you know
those are two different questions
designed to uncover the same thing which
is point out pointing out to you the the
the the comfort of inaction I think
Kennedy made some uh saying statement
about that the long range con uh
consequences of comfortable in action
far out way addressing the problem
that's an absolutely crucial point I
mean one of the things that and this is
an impediment to negotiation in in
marital relationships constantly and
it's a absolute killer you know like I
don't like conflict but I learned
something a long time ago and I learned
that conflict delayed was conflict
continued and multiplied and so if I
have an issue with my wife I'm I would
rather ha you know I read a paper
yesterday I really lik this paper it was
really smart they were doing uh fmri
scanning looking at activation of pain
systems in relationship to other
people's pain and there's quite a
variability in that so people high in
trade agreeableness who are easy to get
along with and who who are sympathetic
and empathetic but who can be easily
taken advantage of by the way that's one
end of the distribution the other end is
disagreeable people who can be callous
and hurtful blunt now slightly somewhat
disagreeable managers by the way are
more successful and many people who seek
therapy are agreeable people who are
being taken advantage of so the fact
that you're empathetic and sympathetic
is not a virtue without its vices or
dangers the brain research revealed that
the more empathic people had a larger
degree of
pain activation in the pain systems when
they saw the pain of other
people okay so now if you don't like
conflict part of the reason you don't
like conflict is because if you see the
person you're having conflict with in
pain you're going to mirror that pain so
that's uncomfortable and I'm an
agreeable person so if I see someone in
pain it strikes me to the core but I
learned that if I deferred conflict then
it's like the cat with its tail being
cut off an inch at a time it's like we
don't have the blowout and so we're
minimizing the pain in the present but
we're radically prolonging it across our
iterated interactions and so it's much
better just to call a spade a spade and
to say look I see the elephant under the
rug I see the snake's tail you know
poking out from the cabinet we're going
to sort this out right here and now and
we're going to we're going to straighten
it out and that's going to be delving
Into the Depths and there's going to be
discomfort in that but if we can nego if
we can identify the problem and
negotiate a compelling Mutual
solution we don't have to have this
problem anymore and man it's such a you
know I saw couples all the time who had
the same bloody fight every day for 30
years you know it's just that's hell and
it much better just to have like the
discussion even though that's that
inaction you know that that you pointed
to that you described Kennedy as
pointing to it's the classically
speaking even theologically there is
much more stress placed on sins of
commission right things you do that are
clearly wrong but avoiding doing
something right that does people in man
especially if they do that repeatedly
and they do it cuz they don't want to
cause trouble cuz they want to avoid
conflict it's like there's no avoiding
necessary conflict is a downward spiral
yeah yeah it ends up you end up having
your discussion in divorce court right
for $200 an hour right while your bank
accounts are drained making the lawyers
Rich yeah yeah lawyers buying a new car
we're keeping the argument going yeah
now you said when you were trying to
circumvent the proclivity for inaction
you'd ask questions like
this is something I used to do when I
was talking to people about say
negotiating for a raise if they were
resentful about their current situation
something like that one of the things we
would do is say okay think about how you
feel about the situation you're in right
now okay now imagine yourself 10 years
older you're in the same position okay
except you're 10 years old 10 years
older yeah you bet man you've put
yourself through an lot of misery for 10
years you're weaker because you've
backed off right you're more bitter
you're more hopeless you're suffering
from more pain like think about that
like empathize with that future person
and tell me what you do in the present
to avoid that fate people would think oh
my God you know that's the last thing I
want because everyone thinks well I'll
deal with it tomorrow but you can say
well you you haven't dealt with it for
the last 5
years and how's that going for you like
would it have been better if you would
have dealt with it 5 years ago and now
you know stretch that out 10 years into
the future see cuz that's so such an
interesting thing to do because the
person has this impediment of the
conflict in front of them that's causing
them to be afraid and what you do is you
swing that behind them it's like getting
the devil behind them get the behind me
Satan I think it's the right word it's
like right right this is the thing
you're afraid of but you should have a
different fear pushing you forward that
way more profound and that would be the
fear of the consequences of inaction
right and how do you get people when
when you're doing that how you said you
ask them open-ended questions is that
how you get them to explore and realize
the costs of inaction yeah the F the
first one is the the what and how
questions I can trigger you into a
really a very sort of narrow confined
mental state without you feeling it's
narrow or
confined I can put you right there with
a what question or how question you know
one of one of my favorite ones these
days is if somebody whatever they doing
for a living and if I ask them what they
do for a living they're going to give me
pretty much of a Canan response I help
people do this or uh I help people do
that or they're going to they're going
to give me a memorized response it's not
a conversation first time I did this I'm
I'm at a Hollywood party a couple years
ago fundraiser for Forest Whitaker I
believe
uh and uh and I'm talking to one of the
self- involved people there force a
great human being by the way phenomenal
human
being and but I'm talking to the self-
involved guy and I don't want to hear a
self-involved conversation so instead of
asking him what does he do for living I
go what do you love about what you do
for a living now what I've done with
that what question is I have put him
right Square in to a part of his brain
focused on love and he transformed in
front of my eyes and I saw him light up
so you know I took I took the what
question and I put him right there and
he he lit up and he started talking to
me about all the things that made him
come alive as a human
being and it ended up being a really
satisfying question now it's one of my
stock questions in nearly any
interaction because I want to find out
about what you you're about what are you
into it's going to give me my my core
your core values almost right off the
bat in a very quick way every now can
you ask what people are afraid of well
same way or do you focus on the positive
now you bring no you're bringing it
you're bringing in the secondary point
which I know I know you know that many
psychologists many uh human nature
practitioners believe that everything we
do is motived by either love or fear so
I can I will also ask in a business
context when I'm trying to find out out
what the motivations are I'll say what
are you afraid of happening here because
then now I've got them in to a different
headp space and I know that fear is a
very substantial significant motivating
factor in people's lives I'm not going
to wield it like a weapon I'm going to
want to become aware of it with you in a
collaborative way and I will ask a
question is very similar to that in
business conversations when we're
talking about what whether or not we're
going to collaborate because I need to
know the fears are going to drive you
the love is going to drive you but fear
has a tendency to overcome fear of loss
of you know a limited number of fears
they'll overcome the love if you're not
careful so I want to know what the fears
are so I can map out better how I can
help you well I would say you know if if
you're having a conversation with your
wife and it starts to get choppy this
this probably occurs in any conversation
I suppose what what the way you would
construe that from a psychoanalytic
point of view is that you're starting to
encounter
resistances right the person doesn't
want to move in that direction maybe
that's even a direction that you jointly
had negotiated would be desirable at
least in principle but then you do want
to find out okay what are the obstacles
what are the fears because the fears
will become obstacles and if they're not
cleared out they'll be in visible
barriers to progress right and it's so
interesting you know when you when you
get people to lay out what they're
afraid of and then what they perceive as
obstacle sometimes merely letting them
describe what it is that they're afraid
of will make the fear evaporate because
they realize that that's a fear that
applied in a different situation or that
you know that they've actually grown out
of Without Really noticing or that
you've already established a pattern of
behavior that indicates that they don't
have to be afraid of that from you and
you know sometimes you can have a
dialogue about that and clear away the
obstacles but often listening is
sufficient to clear those away by itself
you
know these active proactive listening
skills that you have been
discussing many of them have their roots
in Carl Rogers work you know ah yes of
course
yeah absolutely well absolutely abely
absolutely he was really quite brilliant
at detailing out the preconditions for a
conversation you know and that that uh
other point you made about mirroring and
summarizing that's
really that's that's one of the only
things I've ever really discovered that
actually works in some ways as a
technique now it still has to be honest
but there is almost nothing more useful
in a conversation than keeping track of
what it is that the person is saying and
then at the right moment
saying here's what I think you just said
you know compressing it because that's
also a favor to you because you could
remember it then but also to them right
to to compact it in a in a in a more
elegant casing let's say and it's such a
relief to the person it's a mark of
respect because it shows that you've
been paying attention and it's such a
relief to the person because they now
know that you have decided their
concerns are sufficiently worth
attending to that you actually did in
fact pay attention right
exactly when you're negotiating with a
hostage in a hostage
situation what because that's a high
stake
situation what what have you found has
had the most effective consequence is it
is it listening like what do you do in a
situation like that
that that would be different perhaps or
or the same for that matter that you
would do in a business negotiation or
marital negotiation yeah well to some
degree every interaction that somebody's
frustrated with where they've chosen an
action that's
adverse to some degree there's an
element of driving them of not being
heard I'm going to deactivate the the
adversarial
responses to some degree either a little
or a lot just by making them feel hurt
and whatever I don't deactivate is going
to get us down to the real issues it's
going to separate the wheat from the
chaff if you will so I'm going to start
listening right off the bat and I'm also
going to start listening for you know
what what's a deep-seated problem here
and as you said before you know
identifying the elephant in a room often
makes the if it doesn't make the
elephant disappear makes it diminish far
much more and then the the negativity
that we talked about and you mentioned
the fmri
scans it's been shown consistently in a
number of fmri studies that simply
describing
negativity diminished it every time now
the degree it diminishes it
changes but it diminishes describing it
labeling it calling it out not denying
it not explaining it just describing it
always moves you closer to the deal
always now how much it moves you partly
it's cuz you know partly what happens is
that imagine you're being chased by
something one of the reasons you're
afraid of it is because you observe
yourself running now imagine you turn
around and face it you've instantly
signaled to yourself that you have faith
in the part of you that's looking at the
problem and that will immediately
produce positive emotion and diminish
negative emotion it's unbelievably
reliable and the the psychophysiological
transformation is systemic like it's
been mapped from the literally from the
level of DNA upward so there there's a
complete you're it's like you're
inhabited by a different Spirit when
you're running from something that's
chasing you and when you turn around to
confront it and so if you do that
collaboratively you also indicate to the
person let's say if you're the person is
terrified they're the hostage taker but
they're still terrified at the situation
they've got themselves into if they see
that you're brave enough to face the
reality of the situation going to trust
you a hell of a lot more than they would
otherwise and so you do indicate that by
listening so what kind of situations
have you been in on the hostage front
that that tell me a story if you would
about one of the situations that you've
been in where where were you able to put
what you know into practice and how that
how did that turn out yeah well I was uh
very early in my career I was lucky
enough to be involved in a bank robbery
bank robbery with hostages which while
it happens in the movie all the time in
in the real world it's a very rare event
usually the bank robbers are long gone
for the police show up and there's
almost never a situation where there's a
negotiation of bank with
hostages it happened in New York City
early in my career and it had been 20
years since one had happened in New York
City prior to that that's how rare they
are and they were there were there were
two bank robbers inside one guy was a
highly manipulative person who figured
all along that he could he could outwit
everybody and he actually demonstrated a
lot of techniques that I would refer to
as a great CEO negotiator he was
constantly diminishing his influence on
the inside he we got on the phone with
him early on he was like these guys I'm
in here with they're more dangerous than
I am as a matter of fact I'm afraid of
them it's like a CEO saying like look I
can't make this deal because my board's
going to fire me you know I I don't know
I I don't have any influence in my
company I'm a figurehead that's an
important guy the guy who's diminishing
their influence has a lot of it and
doesn't want to get cornered and that's
exactly what this bank robber was
about now I gently confronted him I was
a second negotiator on the phone and I
was coached into some gentle
confrontation by the NYPD Lieutenant
Hugh McGowan brilliant guy he said I
want you to do this this and this and I
want you to confront this guy on his
name first chance you get because this
guy wouldn't even give us his name what
happens when you give up your name when
you give someone your name you agreed to
influence and if you ref refus to give
your name
voluntarily then you're holding a
barrier up and this guy had refused to
give us his even his first name all
along and about 5 hours in when when I
was called in to be the next negotiator
on the phone we'd figured out who he was
was and Hugh said you know I want you to
brace him with his name you know not not
uh accusingly but let him know that we
know who he is and see what
happens triggered a bunch of changes he
immediately first went and got a hostage
and put her on the phone to show us that
he still had live hostages inside
without making a threat I'm talking to
him and suddenly this female comes on
the phone she says I'm okay and and I'm
completely caught off guard and he takes
the phone back away from her and it was
his way of reminding us he had hostages
without making a threat because he was
smart enough that he knew that if if he
tempted fate too much there's a pretty
good chance that a sniper would take him
out he didn't want that he wanted to
figure his way
out I gently confronted him on a couple
of other things it was definite
confrontation but it was gentle he hands
off the phone to the other bank robber
who does not want to be there this guy
is more concerned with surviving than
getting
away and I dial into him very quickly
and just with what I often refer to as a
late night FM DJ
voice about 90 seconds into my
conversation with this guy he says I
trust
you and two hours later he was
surrendering to me outside of the
bank what happened to the other guy who
was more manipulative and smarter and
More in
control well he never right up to the
last minute about 12 hours into the
scenario he got talked out now the the
second bank robber comes out explains
everything to us about what's going on
there aren't seven people inside there
aren't seven bank robbers from different
countries there's one guy left in yeah
even though he still won't admit what
his name is that is the name that you
have
so we get back on the phone with him and
and uh now I'm out of the game because
I'm debriefing the guy surrendered to me
next negotiator up is a hostage
negotiator named Dominic
MSO NYPD negotiator that in to to this
day and Dominic has since deceased but
Don Dominic was one of the world one of
the world's great closers Dominic was a
closer and he just gently narrowly kept
taking ground away from the the other
guy that was inside and his first
conversation with him was gentle
confrontation he said all right so we've
got your partner out here we know who
you are we know what's going
on what do you want me to call
you and even being told that we had his
name this guy comes back and says call
me Billy which is not his name Dominic
is smart enough to go like I'm not going
to get into a fight with this guy over
his name he's like you want me to call
you Billy okay I'll call you Billy
Dominic continue to talk to him we start
working on this guy to come out so what
does he do to continue to maintain
control inside and buy himself time he
lets a hostage go he's got three of them
inside he's got
hostages you know he's got spares and he
knows that if he lets a hostage go the
chances of us assaulting the building
now diminish radically and buy him more
time so he lets one
go and finally he lets another one go
and the irony of this guy's nature and
not collaborating with us no matter what
was when it came down at the end while
we're pressuring him to let the third
hostage go he agrees to come out just to
spite
[Laughter]
us and these type of
situations a human being trapped into a
in a foreign environment which is not
their home we call it
unprepared uh un un unprepared for he's
not prepared for long Siege in a bank
that he's walked into first thing in the
morning he's not going to be able to get
a good night's sleep he's going to start
running out of gas at about 12 hours in
it's just the nature of human beings and
almost exactly 12 hours into the siege
he agrees to come
out and he is looking around uh I can I
can see the images in my head right up
to the moment that we put handcuffs on
him he was still looking for a way out
and interestingly enough while he was
inside the part of the bank was under
construction so what he did was he took
a lot of the bank money and he set it on
fire in the middle of the floor and then
he hid a lot of bank money in the
construction in the walls OB obviously
with the plan they're not going to miss
the hidden money in the walls they're
going to think that it was all burned up
I'm going to be able to come out of here
when I get a CH uh come back here when I
get a chance when I'm out on bail and
I'm going to grab the spare money and
I'm going to get out of here that that's
how he convinced himself that it was
finally okay to
surrender I want to maybe close this up
with two questions and they're somewhat
interrelated when we first started
talking and obviously all the way
through this I noted that you have a
very you you mentioned you brought this
up this FM radio voice and I I noticed
immediately you know not that this is a
testament to my uh my powers of
observation but that you have a very
calm and measured voice and a patient
voice as well and so and then so I want
to talk about that and then I want to
talk about something potentially
Associated um and that's the role of
let's say deception versus truth in
negotiation and sales you know the
amateur salesman that I've met and Bean
for that matter I wouldn't I never used
deception so that's not exactly true but
the amateur salesmen that I've met who
think that an appropriate sales Venture
ends with you know you as the brilliant
manipulator convincing the idiot who's
made the purchase that he needed
something he didn't need are perfectly
willing to use deception and they regard
the outcome as the victory
but my sense has been that
a negotiation that you can't obtain with
truth is one that's very unlikely to
have any lasting staying power and it
also has complications like that are
just going to multiply like man but I'm
wondering you know even in these tense
situations that you're
in how do you view the relationship
between truth and deception in
negotiation and then I'm interested too
in the relationship between that and the
the communication pattern that you have
developed the voice that you use the the
Cadence you know the
calmness how much of that was practiced
how much of it is practice things can be
genuine too but you but I'm I guess I'm
trying to differentiate you know Persona
from from what's genuine and I'm I'm
trying to see that in the relationship
between deception and and Truth in
negotiation yeah well I I'll start I'll
start on the first one deception first
um deception is always a bad idea and
you know my currency is integrity now if
you deceive somebody they're going to
find
out and the invitation to deceive you
know in a hostage negotiation
world they're going to attempt this
because number one they're better Liars
than we are anyway so they're going to
since they're better at it they're going
to spot it right away so then you just
fail the test and secondly they're going
to find out and then your your
credibility is gone if they find out
that you're a liar before they they come
out people get killed and one one of my
favorite conversations favorite I mean
it was I'm working a kidnapping in um in
the Middle
East and it looks Al-Qaeda got a
gentleman and uh I'm talking to the uh
gentleman's Widow to
be and uh his
boss uh the hostage was Paul Johnson and
we want the uh the woman that were just
darar there completely sure al-qaeda's
going to kill him on
Deadline and it looks that way that that
ends up being what ends up happening and
I want her to go into the media and do
an interview before it happens and Paul
Johnson's boss great human being is
watching out for this young lady and is
not exposing her to harm and protecting
her as much as possible and he looks at
me and he says if she does
this is this going to save her husband's
life now I don't think it's going
to and I look at him and I say this is
probably not within
reach and he said I didn't think so I
just want to see if you're going to lie
to
me we'll do whatever you
want and so I you know I I in despite
what the Temptation was you know my core
value core values are what you would
still do even if it costs you and I was
willing to risk her collaboration over
my
integrity and it ended up increasing the
relationship as a result and and that's
the dynamic in in life I mean people
want to know that you'll tell them the
truth they want to know that you're a
straight shooter they want to know if
there's bad news you're not going to
hide it from even by there's deception
by Omission okay so you didn't say
anything you still no and so I'm I'm a
very strong believer that deception by
commission or Omission will always cost
you far more than sticking to your
integrity ever will how did you learn
that
wow yeah no kidding you know I think I
you know my father was a uh was a hard
man and his integrity was extremely
important to him both my both my parents
were that way and I think I I I had the
drilled into my head as a core value
growing up and then I think I probably
made a mistake a couple of times
and behind besides the values that my
parents gave me uh I think I I screwed
up a few times and paid for it probably
so let's sum up here a little bit if we
can so and I'll I'll do a little bit of
it and maybe you can do a little bit of
it filling in where I miss so if you're
negotiating with
someone you're trying to find out what
they want and you're honest about what
you want and you're trying to formulate
a joint vision and plot a course forward
for both of you that you're both very
happy about and that you would abide by
voluntarily and if you're very fortunate
that's going to be a long-term
reciprocal relationship that's pretty
good summary you're good at this summary
stuff and so you you want to find out
too if the person that you're attempting
to play with let's say isn't interested
in that kind of outcome and so
part of the reason you listen to them is
to find out what they want so that you
can negotiate that outcome that you
desire and that hypothetically they
desire but you also want to find out if
that isn't what they want so that you
don't waste your time or theirs and you
don't NE you shouldn't regard that as a
failure because you weren't there to
convince them anyways you were there to
find out if there was something you
could jointly do together and then and
then the the the tricky part the hard
part
is there's a better outcome no matter
what when uh when I was working on the
book never split the difference and my
son Brandon very involved and working
with t RZ who who's the writer tall RZ
is a genius writer and we don't have
anything in it about goal
setting and and we said like look here's
a problem with a goal you quit when you
get there and the first problem or you
get close to it you quit you give up ah
you know close enough so you quit ear
and then the other thing is since since
we live in a in a world of imperfect
information that means that there's
something better beyond your goal and
you'll miss it if your goal focused it
that your goal becomes blinders you miss
better
opportunities and and so we want to
leave stuff about goals out of the book
entirely and tall's like no no no no you
don't understand human beings need goals
so okay and we can see it right so what
we're going to say is your goal is to
exceed your goal and that's what you
jump into a negotiation with and that's
how you come uh to better outcomes with
people right right right that's a well
that's a great place to end like that's
a that's a that's a very
um that's a very successfully negotiated
solution to the problem of the problem
with goals because you were both right
right we can't live without goals but
goals are provisional and so you have to
the Buddhists know this to some degree
you have to hold on to what you're
pursuing even with a light touch because
you don't want it to be an impediment to
what's better and you don't want it to
be finite and you know this is actually
part of the reason that you're trying to
negotiate a relationship with someone
because a relationship is a sequence of
mutual
goals and if the relationship ship is
conducted properly that the
expansiveness of the goals increases
across time right and then that can
happen in an unforeseen Direction so
part of the reason you're trying to find
out who this person is what their
problems are what that they want is to
establish the relationship that allows
you to pursue proximal goals in a way
that allows you to expand your vision of
goals across time right and that can be
indefinite if the relationship is good
right so that's
right my favorite phrase well
all right sir that was good and so for
everybody watching and listening um
first thing I would say is it's very
good thing to learn to negotiate and and
the things you heard today about making
sure there's someone in it for the other
person you know that might even be your
primary goal when you're trying to
establish a relationship with someone
else you know that doesn't mean you take
yourself any less seriously but man the
more there can be in it for the other
person the more you can bloody well be
sure you know with in the bounds of
justice that the negotiation the
settlement that you're aiming at is
going to be sustainable so that's and
then you don't have that concern on your
mind and that's a really good deal and
so and you should be encouraged to
negotiate to the end that you most truly
desire right again keeping the other
person firmly in mind or the other
people and it's a great skill to learn
and concentrating as we've discussed on
listening to the other person you know
they'll tell you how to provide them if
you listen enough the other person will
tell you how to provide them with what
they want and that is a bloody good deal
and you get there from listening and so
if you do that with everyone you meet
you'll never run out of people who want
to collaborate with you they'll line up
and that's a great deal for everyone
especially if you're you know if you
have integrity in your offerings and
you're playing a straight game so it's
not going to work anyway anyways if you
don't yeah all right sir so I'm going to
continue this conversation on The Daily
wire side of things um for half an hour
I'm going to find out um what's
motivating Chris and how that developed
across time and uh we're going to delve
into that I'm very interested in you
know how people are motivated by call
and conscience let's say to end up not
only pursuing the things they're
pursuing but also have ended up
successful in that it's good to see
examples of that so that you know from
those examples what to do and what not
to do so we'll we'll delve into the
background to everything we talked about
today on The Daily Weare plus side and
in the meantime thank you all for your
time and attention thanks very much for
talking to me today it was quite the
pleasure and uh we'll take a bit of a
break and everybody watching and
listening well thank you for tuning in
thank you for your time and attention
and to the Daily wire plus people for
facilitating this that's always much
appreciated good to meet you sir a
pleasure thank you
[Music]